Add state management quickstart (#2320)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/getting-started/quickstarts/statemanagement-quickstart.md

---
type: docs
title: "Quickstart: State Management"
linkTitle: "State Management"
weight: 70
description: "Get started with Dapr's State Store"
---

> Let's take a look at Dapr's [State Management building block]({{< ref state-management >}}). In this quickstart, you will learn how to store and query data as key/value pairs in the [supported state stores]({{< ref supported-state-stores.md >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's take a look at Dapr's [State Management building block]({{< ref state-management >}}).  You can use Dapr's state management consistency and concurrency capabilities to:
* Maintain and test different databases and libraries.
* Handle retries and faults.
```

> State management is one of the most common needs of any application: new or legacy, monolith or microservice. Dealing with different databases libraries, testing them, handling retries and faults can be time consuming and hard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> In this quickstart, you use the key/value pairs in the [supported state stores]({{< ref supported-state-stores.md >}}) and allow an application to save, get, and delete state. Our example below uses a Redis instance, but you can use RabbitMQ, Kafka, etc.

Reviewer: Also - could you please capitalize "Quickstarts" throughout the doc? thanks!

> <img src="/images/state-management-overview.png" width=800 style="padding-bottom:15px;">

Reviewer: Use updated diagram from @greenie-msft

> Dapr provides state management capabilities that include consistency and concurrency options. In this guide we’ll start of with the basics: Using the key/value state API to allow an application to save, get and delete state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dapr provides state management capabilities that include consistency and concurrency options. In this quickstart, you'll use the basic key/value state API to allow an application to save, get, and delete state. 
```

> Dapr provides state management capabilities that include consistency and concurrency options. In this guide we’ll start of with the basics: Using the key/value state API to allow an application to save, get and delete state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this quickstart, you use the key/value pairs in the [supported state stores]({{< ref supported-state-stores.md >}}) and allow an application to save, get, and delete state. Our example below uses a Redis instance, but you can use RabbitMQ, Kafka, etc.
```

Select your preferred language-specific Dapr SDK before proceeding with the quickstart.

{{< tabs "Python" "JavaScript" ".NET" "Java" "Go" >}}
 <!-- Python -->
{{% codetab %}}

### Pre-requisites

For this example, you will need:

- [Dapr CLI and initialized environment](https://docs.dapr.io/getting-started).
- [Python 3.7+ installed](https://www.python.org/downloads/).
- [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop).

### Step 1: Set up the environment

> Clone the sample we've provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clone the [sample we've provided in our quickstarts repo](https://github.com/dapr/quickstarts/tree/master/state_management).
```

```bash

> git clone https://github.com/dapr/quickstarts.git

Reviewer 2: One small ask.  Can we add a note under here or on line 33 with a link pointing to the github repo itself?  I think it's inconvenient that all of our quickstarts only let you see code if you first clone it.

```

### Step 2: Manipulate service state

In a terminal window, navigate to the `order-processor` directory.

```bash
cd state_management/python/sdk/order-processor
```

Install the dependencies:

```bash
pip3 install -r requirements.txt
```

Run the `order-processor` service alongside a Dapr sidecar.

```bash
dapr run --app-id order-processor --components-path ../../../components/ -- python3 app.py
```

> The `order-processor` service writes, reads, and deletes an `orderId` key\value pair to the `statestore` instance [defined in the `statestore.yaml` component]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `order-processor` service writes, reads, and deletes an `orderId` key/value pair to the `statestore` instance [defined in the `statestore.yaml` component]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop.
```

> In the `order-processor` service, we're writing, reading and deleting an orderId key \ value pair to the Redis instance called `statestore` [(as defined in the `statestore.yaml` component)]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `order-processor` service writes, reads, and deletes an `orderId` key\value pair to the `statestore` instance [defined in the `statestore.yaml` component]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop:
```

```python
with DaprClient() as client:

    # Save state into the state store
    client.save_state(DAPR_STORE_NAME, orderId, str(order))
    logging.info('Saving Order: %s', order)

    # Get state from the state store
    result = client.get_state(DAPR_STORE_NAME, orderId)
    logging.info('Result after get: ' + str(result.data))

    # Delete state from the state store
    client.delete_state(store_name=DAPR_STORE_NAME, key=orderId)
    logging.info('Deleting Order: %s', order)
```

### Step 3: View the order-processor outputs

> Notice, as specified in the code above, the code saves application state in the Dapr stat store, reads it and then deletes it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice, as specified in the code above, the code saves application state in the Dapr state store, reads it, then deletes it.
```

- On Linux/MacOS, under `~/.dapr/components/statestore.yaml`

With the `statestore.yaml` component, you can easily swap out the [state store](/reference/components-reference/supported-state-stores/) without making code changes.

The Redis `statestore.yaml` file included for this quickstart contains the following:

```yaml
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: statestore
spec:
  type: state.redis
  version: v1
  metadata:
  - name: redisHost
    value: localhost:6379
  - name: redisPassword
    value: ""
  - name: actorStateStore
    value: "true"
```

In the YAML file:

- `metadata/name` is how your application talks to the component (called `DAPR_STORE_NAME` in the code sample).
- `spec/metadata` defines the connection to the Redis instance used by the component.

{{% /codetab %}}

 <!-- JavaScript -->
{{% codetab %}}

### Pre-requisites

For this example, you will need:

- [Dapr CLI and initialized environment](https://docs.dapr.io/getting-started).
- [Latest Node.js installed](https://nodejs.org/download/).
- [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop)

### Step 1: Set up the environment

> Clone the sample we've set up:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clone the [sample we've provided in our quickstarts repo](https://github.com/dapr/quickstarts/tree/master/state_management).
```

```bash
git clone https://github.com/dapr/quickstarts.git
```

### Step 2: Manipulate service state

In a terminal window, navigate to the `order-processor` directory.

```bash
cd state_management/javascript/sdk/order-processor
```

Install dependencies, which will include the `dapr-client` package from the JavaScript SDK:

```bash
npm install
```

Verify you have the following files included in the service directory:

- `package.json`
- `package-lock.json`

Run the `order-processor` service alongside a Dapr sidecar.

```bash
dapr run --app-id order-processor --components-path ../../../components/ -- npm run start
```

> In the `order-processor` service, we're writing, reading and deleting an orderId key \ value pair to the Redis instance called `statestore` [(as defined in the `statestore.yaml` component)]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `order-processor` service writes, reads, and deletes an `orderId` key\value pair to the `statestore` instance [defined in the `statestore.yaml` component]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop:
```

> The `order-processor` service writes, reads, and deletes an `orderId` key\value pair to the `statestore` instance [defined in the `statestore.yaml` component]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `order-processor` service writes, reads, and deletes an `orderId` key/value pair to the `statestore` instance [defined in the `statestore.yaml` component]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop.
```

```js

> // Save state into the state store

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const client = new DaprClient(DAPR_HOST, DAPR_HTTP_PORT);

// Save state into the state store
```

client.state.save(STATE_STORE_NAME, [
    {
        key: orderId.toString(),
        value: order
    }
]);
console.log("Saving Order: ", order);

// Get state from the state store
var result = client.state.get(STATE_STORE_NAME, orderId.toString());
result.then(function(val) {
    console.log("Getting Order: ", val);
});

// Delete state from the state store
client.state.delete(STATE_STORE_NAME, orderId.toString());    
result.then(function(val) {
    console.log("Deleting Order: ", val);
});

```
### Step 3: View the order-processor outputs

> Notice, as specified in the code above, the code saves application state in the Dapr state store, reads it, then deletes it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice, as specified in the code above, the code saves application state in the Dapr state store, reads it, then deletes it.
```

- On Linux/MacOS, under `~/.dapr/components/statestore.yaml`

With the `statestore.yaml` component, you can easily swap out the [state store](/reference/components-reference/supported-state-stores/) without making code changes.

The Redis `statestore.yaml` file included for this quickstart contains the following:

```yaml
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: statestore
spec:
  type: state.redis
  version: v1
  metadata:
  - name: redisHost
    value: localhost:6379
  - name: redisPassword
    value: ""
  - name: actorStateStore
    value: "true"
```

In the YAML file:

- `metadata/name` is how your application talks to the component (called `DAPR_STORE_NAME` in the code sample).
- `spec/metadata` defines the connection to the Redis instance used by the component.

{{% /codetab %}}

 <!-- .NET -->
{{% codetab %}}

### Pre-requisites

For this example, you will need:

- [Dapr CLI and initialized environment](https://docs.dapr.io/getting-started).
- [.NET SDK or .NET 6 SDK installed](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download).
- [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop)

### Step 1: Set up the environment

> Clone the sample we've set up:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clone the [sample we've provided in our quickstarts repo](https://github.com/dapr/quickstarts/tree/master/state_management).
```

```bash
git clone https://github.com/dapr/quickstarts.git
```

### Step 2: Manipulate service state

In a terminal window, navigate to the `order-processor` directory.

```bash
cd pub_sub/csharp/sdk/order-processor
```

Recall NuGet packages:

```bash
dotnet restore
dotnet build
```

Run the `order-processor` service alongside a Dapr sidecar.

```bash
dapr run --app-id order-processor --components-path ../../../components/ -- dotnet run
```

> In the `order-processor` service, we're writing, reading and deleting an orderId key \ value pair to the Redis instance called `statestore` [(as defined in the `statestore.yaml` component)]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `order-processor` service writes, reads, and deletes an `orderId` key\value pair to the `statestore` instance [defined in the `statestore.yaml` component]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop:
```

> The `order-processor` service writes, reads, and deletes an `orderId` key\value pair to the `statestore` instance [defined in the `statestore.yaml` component]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `order-processor` service writes, reads, and deletes an `orderId` key/value pair to the `statestore` instance [defined in the `statestore.yaml` component]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop.
```

```cs

> // Save state into the state store

Reviewer: ```suggestion
var client = new DaprClientBuilder().Build();

// Save state into the state store
```

await client.SaveStateAsync(DAPR_STORE_NAME, orderId.ToString(), order.ToString());
Console.WriteLine("Saving Order: " + order);

// Get state from the state store
var result = await client.GetStateAsync<string>(DAPR_STORE_NAME, orderId.ToString());
Console.WriteLine("Getting Order: " + result);

// Delete state from the state store
await client.DeleteStateAsync(DAPR_STORE_NAME, orderId.ToString());
Console.WriteLine("Deleting Order: " + order);
```
### Step 3: View the order-processor outputs

> Notice, as specified in the code above, the code saves application state in the Dapr stat store, reads it and then deletes it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice, as specified in the code above, the code saves application state in the Dapr state store, reads it, then deletes it.
```

The Redis `statestore.yaml` file included for this quickstart contains the following:

```yaml
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: statestore
spec:
  type: state.redis
  version: v1
  metadata:
  - name: redisHost
    value: localhost:6379
  - name: redisPassword
    value: ""
  - name: actorStateStore
    value: "true"
```

In the YAML file:

- `metadata/name` is how your application talks to the component (called `DAPR_STORE_NAME` in the code sample).
- `spec/metadata` defines the connection to the Redis instance used by the component.

{{% /codetab %}}

 <!-- Java -->
{{% codetab %}}

### Pre-requisites

For this example, you will need:

- [Dapr CLI and initialized environment](https://docs.dapr.io/getting-started).
- Java JDK 11 (or greater):
  - [Oracle JDK](https://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index.html#JDK11), or
  - [OpenJDK](https://jdk.java.net/13/)
- [Apache Maven](https://maven.apache.org/install.html), version 3.x.
- [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop)

### Step 1: Set up the environment

> Clone the sample we've provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clone the [sample we've provided in our quickstarts repo](https://github.com/dapr/quickstarts/tree/master/state_management).
```

```bash
git clone https://github.com/dapr/quickstarts.git
```

### Step 2: Manipulate service state

In a terminal window, navigate to the `order-processor` directory.

```bash
cd state_management/java/sdk/order-processor
```

Install the dependencies:

```bash
mvn clean install
```

Run the `order-processor` publisher service alongside a Dapr sidecar.

```bash
dapr run --app-id order-processor --components-path ../../../components -- java -jar target/order-processor-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar
```

> In the `order-processor` service, we're writing, reading and deleting an orderId key \ value pair to the Redis instance called `statestore` [(as defined in the `statestore.yaml` component)]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `order-processor` service writes, reads, and deletes an `orderId` key\value pair to the `statestore` instance [defined in the `statestore.yaml` component]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop:
```

> The `order-processor` service writes, reads, and deletes an `orderId` key\value pair to the `statestore` instance [defined in the `statestore.yaml` component]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `order-processor` service writes, reads, and deletes an `orderId` key/value pair to the `statestore` instance [defined in the `statestore.yaml` component]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop.
```

```java
try (DaprClient client = new DaprClientBuilder().build()) {
    for (int i = 1; i <= 10; i++) {
        int orderId = i;
        Order order = new Order();
        order.setOrderId(orderId);

        // Save state into the state store
        client.saveState(DAPR_STATE_STORE, String.valueOf(orderId), order).block();
        LOGGER.info("Saving Order: " + order.getOrderId());

        // Get state from the state store
        State<Order> response = client.getState(DAPR_STATE_STORE, String.valueOf(orderId), Order.class).block();
        LOGGER.info("Getting Order: " + response.getValue().getOrderId());

        // Delete state from the state store
        client.deleteState(DAPR_STATE_STORE, String.valueOf(orderId)).block();
        LOGGER.info("Deleting Order: " + orderId);
        TimeUnit.MILLISECONDS.sleep(1000);
    }
```
### Step 3: View the order-processor outputs

> Notice, as specified in the code above, the code saves application state in the Dapr stat store, reads it and then deletes it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice, as specified in the code above, the code saves application state in the Dapr state store, reads it, then deletes it.
```

- On Linux/MacOS, under `~/.dapr/components/statestore.yaml`

With the `statestore.yaml` component, you can easily swap out the [state store](/reference/components-reference/supported-state-stores/) without making code changes.

The Redis `statestore.yaml` file included for this quickstart contains the following:

```yaml
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: statestore
spec:
  type: state.redis
  version: v1
  metadata:
  - name: redisHost
    value: localhost:6379
  - name: redisPassword
    value: ""
  - name: actorStateStore
    value: "true"
```

In the YAML file:

- `metadata/name` is how your application talks to the component (called `DAPR_STORE_NAME` in the code sample).
- `spec/metadata` defines the connection to the Redis instance used by the component.

{{% /codetab %}}

 <!-- Go -->
{{% codetab %}}

### Pre-requisites

For this example, you will need:

- [Dapr CLI and initialized environment](https://docs.dapr.io/getting-started).
- [Latest version of Go](https://go.dev/dl/).
- [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop)

### Step 1: Set up the environment

> Clone the sample we've provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clone the [sample we've provided in our quickstarts repo](https://github.com/dapr/quickstarts/tree/master/state_management).
```

```bash
git clone https://github.com/dapr/quickstarts.git
```

### Step 2: Manipulate service state

In a terminal window, navigate to the `order-processor` directory.

```bash
cd state_management/go/sdk/order-processor
```

Install the dependencies and build the application:

```bash
go build app.go
```

Run the `order-processor` service alongside a Dapr sidecar.

```bash
dapr run --app-id order-processor --components-path ../../../components -- go run app.go
```

> In the `order-processor` service, we're writing, reading and deleting an orderId key \ value pair to the Redis instance called `statestore` [(as defined in the `statestore.yaml` component)]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `order-processor` service writes, reads, and deletes an `orderId` key\value pair to the `statestore` instance [defined in the `statestore.yaml` component]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop:
```

> The `order-processor` service writes, reads, and deletes an `orderId` key\value pair to the `statestore` instance [defined in the `statestore.yaml` component]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `order-processor` service writes, reads, and deletes an `orderId` key/value pair to the `statestore` instance [defined in the `statestore.yaml` component]({{< ref "#statestoreyaml-component-file" >}}). As soon as the service starts, it performs a loop.
```

```go

>   // Save state into the state store

Reviewer: ```suggestion
client, err := dapr.NewClient()

  // Save state into the state store
```

  _ = client.SaveState(ctx, STATE_STORE_NAME, strconv.Itoa(orderId), []byte(order))
  log.Print("Saving Order: " + string(order))

  // Get state from the state store
  result, _ := client.GetState(ctx, STATE_STORE_NAME, strconv.Itoa(orderId))
  fmt.Println("Getting Order: " + string(result.Value))

  // Delete state from the state store
  _ = client.DeleteState(ctx, STATE_STORE_NAME, strconv.Itoa(orderId))
  log.Print("Deleting Order: " + string(order))
```

### Step 3: View the order-processor outputs

> Notice, as specified in the code above, the code saves application state in the Dapr stat store, reads it and then deletes it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice, as specified in the code above, the code saves application state in the Dapr state store, reads it, then deletes it.
```
